//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
//

= How the ASF works
Apache Software Foundation
:doctype: article
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:toc-position: left
:toc-title: Table of Contents
:numbered:
:homepage: https://apache.org

image::asf_logo.png[pdfwidth=35%,align=center]

== Overview

This page will give you an overview of everything you always wanted to know
about the Apache Software Foundation but were afraid to ask. The difference
between membership and committership, who decides what, how elections take place,
how is our infrastructure setup, what is the board, what is a PMC, whatâ€™s the
philosophy behind the incubator, and how the ASF is dealing with the incredible
growth in new projects and contributors over the years. Come and see behind the scenes of the ASF.

== What is the Apache Software Foundation

The http://www.apache.org/foundation/[Apache Software Foundation] (ASF)
is a 501(c)3 non-profit public charity organization incorporated in the
United States of America and was formed in 1999 primarily to:

* provide a foundation for open, collaborative software development
projects by supplying hardware, communication, and business
infrastructure
* create an independent legal entity to which companies and individuals
can donate resources and be assured that those resources will be used
for the public benefit
* provide a means for individual volunteers to be sheltered from legal
suits directed at the Foundation's projects
* protect the 'Apache' brand, as applied to its software products, from
being abused by other organizations

That's the dry fact, but how did all this come to be and what does it
really mean in its details? We need to step back a little in history.

== A bit of history

The foundation was created in 1999 by a group of people, that called
themselves the "Apache Group" and had come together several years
earlier, to continue to support and maintain the HTTPD web server
written by the NCSA.

That server was freely available, came with source code and was licensed
under a license that allowed very open modification and redistribution,
but the original developers lost interest in that project and moved onto
something else, leaving users with no support.

Some of those users started to exchange fixes (called "patches") and
information on how to prevent problems and improve the existing
software. Brian Behlendorf created a mailing list on his own machine for
those users to collaborate to fix, maintain and improve that software.

The name 'Apache' was chosen from respect for the Native American Apache
Nation, well-known for their superior skills in warfare strategy and
their inexhaustible endurance. It also makes a cute pun on "a patchy web
server" -- a server made from a series of patches -- but this was not
its origin. The group of developers who released this new software soon
started to call themselves the "Apache Group".

Between 1995 and 1999, the Apache HTTPD Web Server created by the Apache
Group became the leader of the market (and currently still is, with more
than 65% of the web sites in the world powered by it).

But as the web grew bigger, economical interests started to grow, and
the Apache web site hosted new sister projects (such as the mod_ perl
project, the PHP project, the Java Apache project). The need for a more
coherent and structured organization that would shield individuals from
potential legal attacks felt more and more necessary.

You can read more about https://www.apache.org/history/[ASF History].

== Meritocracy

Unlike other software development efforts done under an open source
license, the Apache Web Server was not initiated by a single developer
(for example, like the Linux Kernel, or the Perl/Python languages), but
started as a diverse group of people that shared common interests and
got to know each other by exchanging information, fixes and suggestions.

As the group started to develop their own version of the software,
moving away from the NCSA version, more people were attracted and
started to help out, first by sending little patches, or suggestions, or
replying to email on the mail list, later by more important
contributions.

When the group felt that the person had "earned" the merit to be part of
the development community, they granted direct access to the code
repository, thus increasing the group and increasing the ability of the
group to develop the program, and to maintain and develop it more
effectively.

We call this basic principle "meritocracy": literally, government by
merit.

What is interesting to note is that the process scaled very well without
creating friction, because unlike in other situations where power is a
scarce and conservative resource, in the Apache group newcomers were
seen as volunteers that wanted to help, rather than people that wanted
to steal a position.

Being no conservative resource at stake (money, energy, time), the group
was happy to have new people coming in and help, they were only
filtering the people that they believed committed enough for the task
and matched the human attitudes required to work well with others,
especially in disagreement.

After explaining the structure of the ASF, we will see how the
meritocracy relates to the various roles.

== The Foundation structure

As the Apache Web Server started to grow in market share and popularity,
due to synergy of its technical merit and to the openness of the
community behind the project, people started to create satellite
projects. Influenced by the spirit of the community they were used to,
they adopted the same traditions of community management.

So, by the time the ASF was created, there were several separate
communities, each focused on a different side of the "web serving"
problem, but all united by a common set of goals and a respected set of
cultural traditions in both etiquette and process.

These separate communities were referred to as "projects" and while
similar, each of them exhibited little differences that made them
special.

In order to reduce friction and allow for diversity to emerge, rather
than forcing a monoculture from the top, the projects are designated the
central decision-making organizations of the Apache world. Each project
is delegated authority over development of its software, and is given a
great deal of latitude in designing its own technical charter and its
own governing rules.

At the same time, the cultural influence of the original Apache group
was strong and the similarities between the various communities are
evident, as we'll see later.

The foundation is governed by the following entities:

* Board of Directors (board) governs the foundation and is composed of
members.
* Project Management Committees (PMC) govern the projects, and they are
composed of committers. (Note that every member is, by definition, also
a committer.)
* Various Officers of the corporation, appointed by the board, who set
Foundation-wide policies in specific areas (legal, brand, fundraising,
etc.)

For all the details, read our
http://www.apache.org/foundation/governance/[Governance overview].

=== Board of Directors

The board is responsible for management and oversight of the business
and affairs of the corporation in accordance with the foundation
link:bylaws.html[Bylaws]. This includes management of the corporate
assets (funds, intellectual property, trademarks, and support equipment)
and allocation of corporate resources to projects.

However, technical decision-making authority regarding the content and
direction of the Apache projects is assigned to each respective project
management committee.

The board is currently composed by nine individuals, elected between the
members of the foundation. The bylaws don't specify the number of
officers that the board should have, but historically, this was the
number of the first board and it has never changed. The board is elected
every year.

The link:board/[board website] has more information, the list of the
current directors, schedule of meetings, and past minutes.

=== Project Management Committees (PMC)

The Project Management Committees are established by resolution of the
Board, to be responsible for the active management of one or more
communities, which are also identified by resolution of the Board.

Each PMC consists of at least one officer of the ASF, who shall be
designated chairperson, and may include one or more other members of the
ASF.

The chair of the PMC is appointed by the Board and is an officer of the
ASF (Vice President). The chair has primary responsibility to the Board,
and has the power to establish rules and procedures for the day to day
management of the communities for which the PMC is responsible,
including the composition of the PMC itself. See further discussion
about the role of PMC link:../dev/pmc.html#chair[chair] and
link:faq.html#why-are-PMC-chairs-officers[why chairs are officers].

The link:bylaws.html[ASF Bylaws] (section 6.3) define a PMC and the
position of chair. Some other emails help to clarify:
http://www.mail-archive.com/community@apache.org/msg03961.html[here] and
http://www.mail-archive.com/community@apache.org/msg04005.html[here].

The role of the PMC from a Foundation perspective is oversight. The main
role of the PMC is not code and not coding - but to ensure that all
legal issues are addressed, that procedure is followed, and that each
and every release is the product of the community as a whole. That is
key to our litigation protection mechanisms.

Secondly the role of the PMC is to further the long term development and
health of the community as a whole, and to ensure that balanced and wide
scale peer review and collaboration does happen. Within the ASF we worry
about any community which centers around a few individuals who are
working virtually uncontested. We believe that this is detrimental to
quality, stability, and robustness of both code and long term social
structures.

We firmly believe in link:#hats[hats]. Your role at the ASF is one
assigned to you personally, and is bestowed on you by your peers. It is
not tied to your job or current employer or company.

However those on the PMC are kept to a higher standard. As the PMC, and
the chair in particular, are eyes and ears of the ASF Board, it is you
that we rely on and need to trust to provide legal oversight.

The board has the faculty to terminate a PMC at any time by resolution.

The http://www.apache.org/dev/[Apache Developer Information] pages have
many more details of how PMCs work. A complete
http://projects.apache.org/[list of all Apache projects] is also
available.

=== Officers

The link:./[Officers of the Apache Software Foundation] oversee the
day-to-day affairs of the Foundation. The officers are elected by the
link:#board[Board of Directors].

=== Roles

The meritocracy typically has various roles within each individual
Apache project communities:

[cols=",,,",options="header",]
|==================================================================
|`user` |link:#developers[developer] |link:#committers[committer] |
|==================================================================

=== User

A *_user_* is someone that uses our software. They contribute to the
Apache projects by providing feedback to developers in the form of bug
reports and feature suggestions. Users participate in the Apache
community by helping other users on mailing lists and user support
forums.

=== Developer

A *_developer_* is a user who contributes to a project in the form of
code or documentation. They take extra steps to participate in a
project, are active on the developer mailing list, participate in
discussions, provide patches, documentation, suggestions, and criticism.
Developers are also known as *_contributors_* .

=== Committer

A *_committer_* is a developer that was given write access to the code
repository and has a signed
http://www.apache.org/licenses/#clas[Contributor License Agreement
(CLA)] on file. They have an apache.org mail address. Not needing to
depend on other people for the patches, they are actually making
short-term decisions for the project. The PMC can (even tacitly) agree
and approve it into permanency, or they can reject it. Remember that the
PMC makes the decisions, not the individual committers.

=== PMC Member

A *_PMC member_* is a developer or a committer that was elected due to
merit for the evolution of the project and demonstration of commitment.
They have write access to the code repository, an apache.org mail
address, the right to vote for the community-related decisions and the
right to propose an active user for committership. The PMC as a whole is
the entity that controls the project, nobody else. In particular, the
PMC must vote on any formal release of their project's software
products.

=== PMC Chair

The *_Chair_* of a Project Management Committee (PMC) is appointed by
the Board from the link:#pmc-members[PMC Members]. The PMC as a whole is
the entity that controls and leads the project. The Chair is the
interface between the Board and the Project.
https://www.apache.org/dev/pmc.html#chair[PMC Chairs have specific
duties].

=== ASF Member

An *_ASF member_* is a person who was nominated by current members and
elected due to merit for the evolution and progress of the foundation.
Members care for the ASF itself. This is usually demonstrated through
the roots of project-related and cross-project activities. Legally, a
member is a "shareholder" of the foundation, one of the owners. They
have the right to elect the board, to stand as a candidate for the board
election and to propose a committer for membership. They also have the
right to propose a new project for incubation (we'll see later what this
means). The members coordinate their activities through their mailing
list and through their annual meeting. We have a
https://www.apache.org/foundation/members.html[full listing of Apache
Members].

== Project Management and Collaboration

The Apache projects are managed using a collaborative, consensus-based
process. We do not have a hierarchical structure. Rather, different
groups of contributors have different rights and responsibilities in the
organization.

Since the appointed Project Management Committees have the power to
create their own self-governing rules, there is no single vision on how
PMCs should run a project and the communities they host.

At the same time, while there are some differences, there are a number
of similarities shared by all the projects:

=== Communication

Communication is done via mailing lists. These identify "virtual meeting
rooms" where conversations happen asynchronously, which is a general
requirement for groups that are so geographically distributed to cover
all time zones (like it's normally the case for the various Apache
communities).

Some projects additionally use more synchronous messaging (for example,
IRC or instant messaging). Voice communication is extremely rare,
normally because of costs and the language barrier (speech is harder to
understand than written text).

In general, asynchronous communication is much more important because it
allows archives to be created and it's more tolerant on the volunteer
nature of the various communities.

=== Documentation

Each project is responsible for its own link:projects.html[project
website]. Further information to assist committers, developers, and PMCs
is available at link:../dev/[ASF Infrastructure].

=== Decision Making

Projects are normally auto governing and driven by the people who
volunteer for the job. This is sometimes referred to as "do-ocracy" --
power of those who do. This functions well for most cases.

When coordination is required, decisions are taken with a lazy consensus
approach: a few positive votes with no negative vote is enough to get
going.

Voting is done with numbers:

* +1 -- a positive vote
* 0 -- abstain, have no opinion
* -1 -- a negative vote

The rules require that a negative vote includes an alternative proposal
or a detailed explanation of the reasons for the negative vote.

The community then tries to gather consensus on an alternative proposal
that resolves the issue. In the great majority of cases, the concerns
leading to the negative vote can be addressed.

This process is called "consensus gathering" and we consider it a very
important indication of a healthy community.

Specific cases have some more
https://www.apache.org/foundation/voting.html[detailed voting rules].

=== Philosophy

While there is not an official list, these six principles have been
cited as the core beliefs of philosophy behind the foundation, which is
normally referred to as "The Apache Way":

* collaborative software development
* commercial-friendly standard license
* consistently high quality software
* respectful, honest, technical-based interaction
* faithful implementation of standards
* security as a mandatory feature

All of the ASF projects share these principles. Similarly, Apache
projects are required to
http://community.apache.org/projectIndependence.html[govern themselves
independently] of undue commercial influence.

=== Operation

All projects are composed of volunteers and nobody (not even members or
officers) are paid directly by the foundation for their job. There are
many examples of committers that are paid to work on the projects, but
never by the foundation themselves, but rather by companies or
institutions that use the software and want to enhance it or maintain
it.

Note that the ASF does contract out various services, including
accounting, Press and Media relations, and infrastructure system
administration.

=== Individuals compose the ASF

All of the ASF including the board, the other officers, the committers,
and the members, are participating as individuals. That is one strength
of the ASF, affiliations do not cloud the personal contributions.

Unless they specifically state otherwise, whatever they post on any
mailing list is done _as themselves_. It is the individual
point-of-view, wearing their personal hat and not as a mouthpiece for
whatever company happens to be signing their paychecks right now, and
not even as a director of the ASF.

All of those ASF people implicitly have multiple hats, especially the
Board, the other officers, and the PMC chairs. They sometimes need to
talk about a matter of policy, so to avoid appearing to be expressing a
personal opinion, they will state that they are talking in their special
capacity. However, most of the time this is not necessary, personal
opinions work well.

Some people declare their hats by using a special footer to their email,
others enclose their statements in special quotation marks, others use
their apache.org email address when otherwise they would use their
personal one. This latter method is not reliable, as many people use
their apache.org address all of the time.

=== Balancing confidentiality and public discussion

We endeavour to conduct as much discussion in public as possible. This
encourages openness, provides a public record, and stimulates the
broader community.

However sometimes internal private mail lists are necessary. You must
never divulge such information in public without the express permission
of the list. Also never copy an email between private and public lists
(no Cc). Such an event would go beyond the normal need for email
ettiquette and be a serious breach of confidence. It could have serious
ramifications, cause unnecessary confusion and ill-informed discussion.

Private lists are typically only used for matters pertaining to people
as individuals (like voting in new committers), and legal matters that
require confidentiality.

=== The Foundation Incubator

In order for new projects to be created, the ASF created a project
called http://incubator.apache.org/[Incubator] which is responsible to
help new efforts to join the foundation.

Since the meritocratic rules operate across the ASF from bottom to top,
it is vital for the long-term stability of such a form of government,
that the initial set of committers has to know very well the dynamics of
such a system, as well as share the same philosophical attitude toward
collaboration and openness that the ASF expects from its projects.

The incubator is responsible for:

* filtering the proposals about the creation of a new project or
sub-project
* help the creation of the project and the infrastructure that it needs
to operate
* supervise and mentor the incubated community in order for them to
reach an open meritocratic environment
* evaluate the maturity of the incubated project, either promoting it to
official project/ sub-project status or by retiring it, in case of
failure.

It must be noted that the incubator (just like the board) does not
perform filtering on the basis of technical issues. This is because the
foundation respects and suggests variety of technical approaches. It
doesn't fear innovation or even internal confrontation between projects
which overlap in functionality.

The incubator filters projects on the basis of the likeliness of them
becoming successful meritocratic communities. The basic requirements for
incubation are:

* a working codebase -- over the years and after several failures, the
foundation came to understand that without an initial working codebase,
it is generally hard to bootstrap a community. This is because merit is
not well recognized by developers without a working codebase. Also, the
friction that is developed during the initial design stage is likely to
fragment the community.
* the intention to donate copyright of the software and the intellectual
property that it may contain to the foundation -- this allows the
foundation to obtain an irrevocable and permanent right to redistribute
and work on the code, without fearing lock-in for itself or for its
users.
* a sponsoring ASF member or officer -- this person will act as the main
mentor, giving directions to the project, helping out in the day-to-day
details and keeping contact with the incubator PMC.

The incubation period normally serves to estimate whether or not:

* the project is able to increase the diversity of its committer base
and to play with the meritocratic rules of the foundation.

It might seem rather easy to achieve, but it must be remembered that in
a volunteer and highly selective environment, attracting new committers
is not automatic.

Diversity of committership is important for two main reasons:

* it gives long term stability to the project development: in fact, with
all the developers affiliated to the same entity, the chance of seeing
all of them moving away from the project at the same time is much
greater than with a community of individuals affiliated to unrelated
entities.
* it gives a greater variety of technical visions: something that
guarantees a better adherence to environment and user's needs, thus a
higher change of finding real-life use of the software.

== Other Foundation Entities

Along with the Incubator, the foundation has several other
cross-foundation projects. For example the ASF does not have offices or
buildings, it's a virtual entity that exists only on the internet and
the technical infrastructure that enables it to operate is managed by
the link:../dev/infrastructure.html[Infrastructure team].

These and other cross-foundation projects are described on the
link:foundation-projects.html[Foundation Projects] page.

The ASF also hosts some foundation-wide mailing lists, which are
detailed on the link:mailinglists.html[Mailing Lists] page.

== In review

Within the first 10 years of operation, the ASF represents one of the
best examples of an open organization that has found balance between
structure and flexibility. We have grown from 200 committers to around
3000, and that number continues to grow on a daily basis. We have been
able to create several software products that are leaders in their
market. We have also been able to find balance between openness and
economical feasibility. This has earned us respect from a range of
people, from single individuals to multinational corporations. We hope
to continue to provide inspiration for businesses, governments,
education, and for other software foundations.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Apache Software Foundation, Licensed under the
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0[Apache License, Version 2.0].

Apache and the Apache feather logo are trademarks of The Apache Software
Foundation.
